# LCD Screen 1602
This is a small screen module for use with micro computers. It has a 16x2 LCD screen. Two potentiometers can be used to adjust the brightness of the text and the background of the screen. Once the device has been connected, with a number of power and GPIO pins needing to be wired to the right inputs, a series of signals can be sent over the wires in different encodings in order to control the display.
I have made use of code from an online tutorial for this purpose. Proper attribution can be found in the source files, contained in the ```lib``` directory.
## Wiring
For my purposes it was sufficient to connect the screen in 4-bit mode, meaning that only four of the eight pins needed to be connected.
### Screen Controls
I have run power from the ```VBUS``` pin on the Pico, nominally 5V, to one of the potentiometers. The other side of the potentiometer goes to the ```A``` pin. This controls screen brightness.
The other potentiometer connects the ```V0``` pin on the LCD to the ground on the Pico. This potentiometer controls text brightness on the display.
### Input Pins
The four pins used for 4-bit mode input are simply connected sequentially to GPIO pins.
### Power and Control Bit Pins
The other pins on the LCD device have the following functions. ```VSS``` for ground to the Pico; ```VDD``` for power in from the Pico; ```RS``` for register selection; ```RW``` for read/write; ```E``` for enable, to enable certain functions internally; and ```K``` for LED ground. The power and ground pins need to be connected to power and ground on the Pico respectively. The ```RW``` and ```K``` pins also get connected to ground. The control pins for the display must be connected to GPIO pins on the Pico.
## Code
The code I am using consists of two modules. One contains a base class with the API for an LCD screen. The other contains a class which inherits from this one, and implements the functions for implementing the commands sent from the parent class.
In order to use these modules, one need only import the child class.
### Setup
```
from machine import Pin
from gpio_lcd import GpioLcd
```
Then the object needs to be initialised, passing in the appropriate pin numbers to match the wiring choices one has made. I will be showing the example I use for a screen in 4-bit mode with the pin numbers I have chosen. The code can be examined for information on how to implement 8-bit mode.
```
screen = GpioLcd(rs_pin=Pin(15), enable_pin=Pin(14),
                d4_pin=Pin(13), d5_pin=Pin(12),
                d6_pin=Pin(11), d7_pin=Pin(10))
```
Other optional arguments can be found in the source code, such as the number of lines and columns on the screen.
### Usage
Having initialised the screen, a number of methods are now available, which can be used to display characters on the screen. The most commonly used procedure is as follows:
```
screen.clear()
screen.move_to(0,0)
screen.putstr(<String>)
```
The ```move_to``` method takes arguments in the form of 0 indexed line and column numbers, defaulting to 0 for both. With these commands, most text editing on the screen can be performed. Often it will be necessary to require the code loop to pause while displaying. The ```sleep``` method imported from ```utime``` will be useful for this. It makes sense to display a line and then wait 1-2 seconds for the user to read before displaying more text. Otherwise whatever is displayed will vanish before it can be seen.
Other available methods include ```show_cursor```, ```hide_cursor```, ```blink_cursor_on```, ```blink_cursor_off```, ```display_on```, ```display_off```, ```backlight_on``` and ```backlight_off```. The class also makes two other methods available for displaying characters, which are ```putchar``` and ```custom_char```. ```custom_char``` takes one of eight ```CGRAM``` locations, followed by a byte array of hex codes.
For the most part, however, ```clear```, ```move_to``` and ```putstr``` will suffice for displaying text.
